# Learning
## Learn to Learn

This repo gathers materials that students should find useful in learning how to learn.

## Unwillingness to Learn or to learn How to Learn.
It seems to me that the biggest obstacle to third-level students learning is not the technical complexity of the matters covered by undergraduate engineering programmes. The biggest obstacle, in my experience is the students' inability to learn at the level required to desrve a degree in engineering. Sometimes, in the more negative extreme, it is an unwillingness or a refusal to learn that holds students back. More worryingly it is a refusal to learn how to learn.

It is a big step for a stiudent to admit that they don't know how to learn. CAO points, a place in college, a leaving certificate etc., these do not confirm a student's ability to learn. Even less, they don't confirm a student's intelligence, potential or knwoledge of any topic. The Leaving Certificate in Ireland appears designed to teach students how to pass the LEaving Certificate. As a test of a stuednt's ability to learn broader topics, it fails, and it gives third-leel educators little or no affirmation of their students' abilities or learning skills.

## Learning Skills
## Technical Skills
## Expectations through the undergraduate journey
The following sub-sections will discuss and explore the expectations that students should have of their experience at stages 1, 2, 3, 4 of a four-year undergraduate programme. Of necessity, due to the very diverse nature of the stage-1 (CAO generally) intake into the programme, there is an element of leveling at this stage. It is an opportunity for students to explore what it will mean to be an engineer, to solve problems, to apply those solutions to challenges that enhance our world.

### Stage 1 expectations
Students need to un-learn a lot at stage 1 of an engineering programme.

### Stage 2 expectations
Students need to start to understand the relationship between all modules covered in stage 2 and the relationships between those modules and those covered in stage 1 of the programnmne. Evidence shoudl be visible of students incorporaitng into their approach to a given module, lessons and learning outcomes derived from other modules, at this stage or at stage 1.

### Stage 3 expectations
The student needs to build upon the solid foundaiton provided by stages 1 and 2 and to build their confidence at learning new teachnical skills that rely on fundamental engineering concepts already covered on the programme at earlier stages. In cases where the student intends to progress to stage 4 of the programme, this is where a student solidifies their confidence that technical matters included on the programme are within their grasp, and that as such matters appear more challenging, so too they are invoking skills developed at an earlier stage  of the pgrramme to address the challenges.

### Stage 4 expectations
By the time a stuednt progresses to stage 4 of a 4-year undergraduate engineering degree, they _should_ have mastered the tehincal skills that they can now apply to a personal final year project, their dissertation project.
The _dissertation project_ is an opportunity for the student to demonstrate several positive attributes that would make them a good hire upon graduaiton from the programme.
These graduate attributes are not well represented by a list of grades, but are demonstrated in a more holistic manner by a project that explores a students skills and application over a period of several months.

# Anecdotes
_Oisín and the Ultrasonic Sensor._
In recent weeks, I had occasion to sit in on some final year dissertaion presentations. Notwithstanding that some of these were disappointing, they all passed and will all graduate with degrees in engineering in the coming months. One of these projects included a student using an ultrasonic sensor, and an arduino to read depth of liquid in a tank. There are seveal challenges with this approach, but that's not what concerned me. I was not convinced the student ever got any data from the ulrasonic sensor uing the arduino. That exercise is included as a standard template in the arduino IDE. I could be mistaken, but the impression I got was that the student, a 4th year student in computer engineering did not know how to read an ultrasonic sensor using an arduino. Fine, that should not be a core examinable skill. But that the student appeared not to understand the level of technical skills that a graduate engineer should be able to display, that's what concerned me. Maybe it was failing on my part to understand what they were saying and what they actualy achieved. 

The following weekend, I had a nephew visit us for a few days. 14 years of age, going into junior cert year in September, and convinced that he is not any good at school. He repairs carburettors on lawnmowers etc. and runs his own gardening business in Newbrige. One evening, after dinner, I gave him an [Arduino Starter Kit](https://store.arduino.cc/products/starter-kit-r4?utm_source=google&utm_medium=cpc&utm_campaign=EU-Pmax&gad_source=1&gad_campaignid=22591753150&gbraid=0AAAAACbEa84OJeR0sa2DKAWvI89-Judm4&gclid=Cj0KCQjwguLSBhDLARIsAH-yPrE8sAIAnAiWkRGRW3MvMiTcIev5DX3YIXwdysrHyzfJkfD-JxQr7D4aAm7PEALw_wcB). I gave himn very little instruciton just let him at it. Three hours later he packed it in for the night, having successfully built a selection of the three most interesting projects in the kit: Knock Lock, Spaceship Countdown, Magic 8 Ball probably. These included LEDs, piezo sensor, servo motor, LCD display screen, temperature sensor. He took the kit home with him, and complete all of the other projects over the coming weeks, even repeating some of them a few times. 

What I take out of this is very subjective, but I see a young lad, who has not (yet) expressed any interest in software, electronics, etc. He has never done electronics or any form of coding at school, which is something of an indictment of our education system. Yet, left to his own devices (excuse the pun) and armed only with his own curiosity, he made significant progress at building basic electronic projects, each of which would form the basis of an undergradute project at stage 1 or stage 2. 

## Dunning Kruger Effect
The [Dunning Kruger Effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunning%E2%80%93Kruger_effect) is central to understanding any engineer's learning journey. If a graduate engineer has not experienced the valley of despair, then they are not yet ready to join any engineering team where brutal honesty, with oneself as well as with others, is a requirement.

## If you know you know
Or rather, if you don't know, you don't know. Consider a learner who knows little enough about a topic, and about the engineering programme on which they are enrolled, that they don't know what they are or are not expected to know. The easiset route, and taken by some, is to present the view that any techincal challenge is beyond the reasonable scope of the programme, and of any specific modules contained therein, to maintain that anything they have undertaken and completed successfully is so because of their tenacity and intelligence, that anything they have either not attempted or not succeeded at were entirely outside the scope of reasonable expectations in the first place. Often that self-defined scope of reasonable expectation is entirely self-serving, reinforced by group-think among peers and sets the bar very low in terms of effort and achievement. On the flip-side, we occasionally encounter students who don't know what they shouldn't know, and who will consistenyly puch themselves to undertake and to achieve precisely because they didn't know when to categorise some ambition as unreasonable. 

## Can we call 'Bullshit' on excuses?
Is it reasonable of us to call bullshit on self-serving excuses for underperformance. Their dogs' appetite for homework can no longer be used as most students won't write antghing down, but I have seen an email from a parent whose child, sorry, university student, took an entire semester to get over the loss of the family pet. 

## Is there a Psychologist in the house
Adolesence, not the movie, but the state of mind. We are dealing with a cohort of students whose adolesence (let the phychologist confirm this) has been extended significantly compared with previous generations. There was a time when turning 18 was elebrated by all as a majoe milestone. Leaving secondary school, starting a job, moving out of home, or in the rare case moving away from home to attend University. In the majority of cases, nowadays, it seems, only the first, leaving secondary school is still commonplace. The others, not so much and along with the family home being occupied by university students still living with parents, many such households are now boomerang homes, where other family members, having once left home have returned becuase their chosen paths _didn't suit them_ etc. 
In any case, the consequence is that with few other significant changes to signal an end to adolesence and a transition to self-reliance and adulthood, our university students remain adolescents rather than teenage adults. Responsibility for housing, transport, utilities, clothing etc. remain with somebody else, parents. Is it thus unrealistic to expect that responsibility for their education should transfer from parents, or teachers, to the individual student. From experience, it does not. Reasons and excuses for non-performance invaiably include an element of powerlessness over their situations, of a lack of any agency over the circumstances as might, had the univers been better aligned in their favour, have allowed them to fully meet the assessment or assignment specifications.

## The mathemaics of academic grades
Right so, do we all agree that a grade of 100% should represent a student convincing the examiner that there is nothing about a given topic that the candidate has not demonstrated, or is capable of demonstrating, in their CA or formal exam. Maybe the topic is not very challenging, but if the student has met all of the Learning Outcomes, then don;t they deserve 100%? I suppose so. But the issue is that the candiate must convince the examiner. If the examiner has a very clear, strict and strong rubric to grade against, then it can be easy to demonstrate that the student has met those requirements in their entirety. If the rubric is ill-defined, that it is more difficult to stand over such a grade, or indeed to assert that it was deserved.

So, is 100% the target, yes it is. Because, particularly in stages 1, 2, 3, the student is demonstrating mastery of foundational topics that will serve as the foundations for later topics. A student scoring just 40% in every atage 1 topic may well progress to stage 2, but will be missing up to 60% of the requisite learning outcomes form the stage 1 mondules. Thus, 40% is not a good redommendation for progress to later stages, unless, as NEVER happens, the student uses the missing 60% as a pointer to the catch-up work they need to do before embarking on stage 2.

Thus, one could take the view that the broad acceptance of the 40% grade affirms the view that there is no point in striving for better, as both the 100% student and the 40% student progress to the following stage with no distinction between them other than a meaningless (at stage 1, 2 or 3) GPA.

If we compound the 60% understanding that is missing, and if we accept that earlier modules are the foundation for later modules, then a student with a 40% grade in stage 1 is missing 60% of the foundation for the stage 2 modules. A 40% grade in stage 2, then indicates *by a certain arithmetic) thay they have mastered 16% of a module by the end of atage 2 (40% x 40%). FOllowing that logic, they are on even less solid foundations by the end of stage 3, with only 6% compounded mastery of the topic. 

I am not a religious person, but I often refer to a phrase from the christian bible where we are advised, when asked to travel a mile with somebody, to go two, to go the extra mile. In this circumstance it is ourselves, the learners, who are doing thwe asking, and the travelling. We need to ask ourselves to go the full mile, and the extra mile if that's what it takes to fully mater a topic. The imbalnace in responsibilities created by students progressing on 40% (and doing nothing to address the gap) means that the teacher * is being held resposible for catching the learner up, or tasked with slowing the learning down to accommodate those who have not, and will not, master the foundational concepts covered in other modules at the same or previous stages.

## Referencing 
Engineering is not credible without documentation to back it up. None of us wants to fly on an aeroplane that was built without a design, without documentation confirming its strength, suitability for purpose etc. Saying you will document it later is a lie. You will not. I know that and you know that. Read this article on the [Boeing 737 MAX Groundings](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boeing_737_MAX_groundings). Lives were lost because software systems were not documented or at very least those documents were not brought to the attentoion of the people who needed them most, the pilots.

## Yeah, I was going to do that next
No you weren't. You are taking my question about a step that you missed, or were going to ignore, and turning it into a virtue to day that it was on your list. Ok, show me the list. Better still, share the list with me from the outset and i will help you decide if the things that you 'were going to do next' should have been done sooner, or needed to be done at all.

## We didn't shoose you, you chose us
Our students sometime demonstrate traits that suggest we, the University, are more invested in their retention (and even success) on their chosen programmes of study, than they are. SUre we are interested in their success, but we canot, and should not carry the majority of the burden here. No student arrives on our programmes without having expressed a wish to be here. Does that wish evaporate as soon as they have secured a place? What thay wish to study engineering no more than a strategic decision that weighed up the CAO points nthey thought they might get in the Leaving Cert against the offerings available (sorted in descenting order of last year's cuo-off CAO points)? Are our students compelled to be here? Not by us they are not. Sure, the University cares about retention numbers, but those retention numbers are meaningless if they are driven entirely by the actions of the University, unmatched by a corresponding energy, and more, from the students?

# Integrity - It's about Integrity
True character is revealed by our actions in private—when there is no audience, no applause, and no chance of recognition. It suggests that a gentleman's (or gentlewoman's) behavior is driven by an internal moral compass rather than a desire for external validation. [source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integrity).
ENgineers must have integrity. THey must do the right thing, enven when, particularly when they know there will be oposition to doing so. This goes way beyond the notion that one can become an engineer by having a piece of paper that says you failed no more than 60% of the assessment that were set for you.

Engineers make decisions that improve lives, or save lives, or cost lives. To present something as an engineering solution to a problem is to state, imnplicity, if never explicitly, that it will improve a siuation and not disimprove it. Yes, it should be possible to prove that the solution will improve a situation, and to do so explicitly dy documeting the entire process so that others might examine, and validate what you did. So that others might reprodue it and examine every little aspect to see the solution performs as stated, or if the smallest part might be further improved etc.
